Blog: product engineer vs software engineer (#4805)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/product-engineer-vs-software-engineer.md

---
date: 2022-12-01
title: "Product engineer vs software engineer: what's the difference?"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
categories: ["Startups", "Guides"]
---

> There are always arguments about what is the best way to run a tech company, how you should structure a company, and what roles you should have. Tech companies are endlessly trying to innovate in company composition to get work done effectively.
> 
> A recent addition to the debate is the role of the product engineer. The role of the product engineer changed the way companies think about engineering. Is a greater focus on product necessary to succeed now? Are older structures and engineering roles outdated?
> 
> To help you think through this yourself, we’ll compare the role of product engineer with the role of software engineer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Software companies are changing. Where once product managers and software engineers dominated, now a new role is emerging: the [product engineer](/blog/what-is-a-product-engineer).

Want proof? Look at this graph:

![product-engineer-trends](../images/blog/product-engineer-trend.png)

Online searches for product engineers have grown over 80% in the last year and are 3x greater now than just two years ago.

Product engineers are changing the way companies think about engineering. To help explain why, we’ll compare the role of product engineer with the traditional (and still very necessary) role of full-stack software engineer.
```

Added this search trend graph for some social proof – I'm wondering if we could back this up with some data from a recruiting website? Someone must have done some research in this area?

Minor SEO note: It's always a good idea to link to high value pages higher in the copy, not just the footer. Google gives more weight to links higher up the page.

Author: I've tried to find some data from a recruiting site, but haven't had any luck.

> ## What does each role focus on?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How are product and software engineers different?
```

> 

Reviewer: Here's the TL;DR: 
- Product engineers focus on building great products.
- Software engineers focus on building great software.

Let's break those points down a bit more.

Software engineers on the other hand focus on building great software. Their primary purpose is to write clean, efficient, and secure code. They own the code they write. They care more about solving technical problems and optimizing systems.

Many software engineers have less say in what they work on. They have flexibility with implementation, but they aren’t making product decisions. Their team helps them with that, meaning they can focus on the technical implementation.

Product engineers are less focused on implementation and focus more on solving the users’ problems. In this way, they are pragmatic. They are willing to build fast, iterate, or even from scratch if needed.

Software engineers are more idealistic. They look for the best solution to the problem in front of them, focus on best practices, and build off prior work. Security, risk, and scaling weigh heavier in their minds.

> ## How does each spend their time?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How does they spend their time?
```

> Product engineers spend their time in a variety of ways. A majority of their time is still spent coding, but they have responsibilities outside of coding than software engineers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Product engineers still spend the majority of their time coding, but they have responsibilities outside of coding that software engineers don't.
```

Product engineers also spend their time talking to customers, digging into usage data, and researching the competitive landscape. They test other products, build prototypes, and brainstorm experiments to make their product better.

They spend time communicating with users, their team, and other members of the company. They communicate what they learned in research, why their work relates to that research, and how to prioritize what to work on next. They own the product roadmap, and this comes with a responsibility to communicate it.

> Software engineers focus on writing code, testing it, and maintaining it. They  look for ways to optimize code, improve scalability, and solve bugs. They are deeply focused on specific areas of technology, whether that is databases, data pipelines, backend APIs, or client-side app frameworks. This means researching and reading documentation, updates, and code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Software engineers focus on writing code, testing it, and maintaining it. They look for ways to optimize code, improve scalability, and solve bugs. They are deeply focused on specific areas of technology, whether that is databases, data pipelines, backend APIs, or client-side app frameworks. This means researching and reading documentation, updates, and code.
```

## What do their teams and companies look like?

Product engineers are often a part of smaller teams, where they must do more themselves. Startups, and earlier-stage companies that require people to do more, are often looking for product engineers (even if they don’t say it). They need people who can own large decisions and ship quickly. Product engineers fit this need.

Software engineers are part of larger teams, usually spread out across multiple teams. They have a team to support them, so they can specialize. Their team might include designers, product managers, and marketers. This allows them to think less about if what they are building is right, and more about the implementation.

> At the end of the day, it’s up to the company and team to decide what roles they need. There are always debates about what the right structure and right roles are. Product engineers and software engineers both have their place in the tech world. It all comes down to the goals of the team and the needs of the customers.

Reviewer: I think we should refocus this section on "Why do companies want product engineers?" and go a tiny bit deeper here. 

For example, while their most common at early-stage companies, how do product engineers fit into larger orgs – if they do?

I think we could make this a bit topical by maybe referencing Elon's adventures at Twitter here. Explicit or not, what he's seeking is essentially product engineers who can ideate and execute ideas. (my interpretation, feel free to disagree).

The theme is small companies need T-shaped engineers and large companies want them to make them more agile and responsive to users. (again, my interpretation!)

Author: Got it, added a bit about this and added the example of Elon's adventures.

## What’s right for you?

As a person, if owning a product and its roadmap as well as responsibility for its success or failure interests you, then product engineering might be for you. If you want to focus on solving difficult technical problems and optimizing existing technologies and processes, then software engineering might be a better choice.

There isn’t a right answer, and roles change as companies change. It is possible a product engineer to focus on a specific area and becomes a software engineer as a company grows. It’s also possible for software engineers to join new teams or companies and take on a product engineering role.

As a company, having software engineers appeals to companies with a large-scale or complex products. Software engineers can focus deeply on specific areas of technology and are great for optimizing systems.

Startups or companies that want to be agile and move fast, should look for product engineers. Product engineers have a holistic view of the product and the ability to move fast when the need arises.

> Picking what is right is up to the company and its culture. If focusing on building great products is a priority, product engineers might be a better choice. If scaling and building expertise throughout the company is a focus, then software engineers are likely better. Companies with both types of roles have succeeded and more will continue to succeed.

Reviewer: I think we need to be a bit more opinionated here, particularly around the skills needed to be a successful product engineer. The biggest point, I suspect, is you need to comfortable talking to users so I think we should say this outright.

Author: It is more opinionated now.

## Further reading

- [What is a product engineer (and why they matter)](/blog/what-is-a-product-engineer/)
- [Startups, stop treating engineers like a different species](/blog/stop-treating-engineers-differently)

> - [22 ways PostHog makes it easier to build great products](/blog/using-posting)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [The really important job interview questions engineers should ask (but don't)](/blog/what-to-ask-in-interviews)
```

## How do they spend their time?

Product engineers still spend the majority of their time coding, but they have responsibilities outside of coding that software engineers don't.

Product engineers also spend their time talking to customers, digging into usage data, and researching the competitive landscape. They test other products, build prototypes, and brainstorm experiments to make their product better.

They spend time communicating with users, their team, and other members of the company. They communicate what they learned in research, why their work relates to that research, and how to prioritize what to work on next. They own the product roadmap, and this comes with a responsibility to communicate it.

Software engineers focus on writing code, testing it, and maintaining it. They look for ways to optimize code, improve scalability, and solve bugs. They are deeply focused on specific areas of technology, whether that is databases, data pipelines, backend APIs, or client-side app frameworks. This means researching and reading documentation, updates, and code.

> ## Why do companies choose product versus software engineers?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why is demand for product engineers growing?
```

> Product engineers are often a part of smaller teams, where they must do more themselves. Startups and earlier-stage companies that require people to do more are often looking for product engineers (even if they don’t say it). They need people who can own large decisions and ship quickly. Product engineers fit this need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's no single reason, but typically it's motivated by a desire to ship product improvement faster. Product engineers are popular among startups and early-stage companies for this reason, even if they don’t say it.
```

Software engineers are part of larger teams, usually spread out across multiple teams. They have a team to support them, so they can specialize. Their team might include designers, product managers, and marketers. This allows them to think less about if what they are building is right, and more about the implementation.

Companies choose roles and team structures based on their goals. Small companies (or innovative teams within larger companies) need people who can ideate and execute product ideas. Large and mature companies need people who can specialize in key areas of technology and optimize them.

> For example, when Elon Musk bought Twitter, he had the goal of making dramatic changes to the product. He needed product engineers to quickly execute these changes. He wanted proof they could do this, which is why he forced engineers to show him what code they shipped recently. He didn't need software engineers to continue to maintain or optimize the existing codebase. This led to a big shift in team structure, with a large number of software engineers (and other roles) leaving the company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elon Musk's Twitter is a good example of company that might benefit from product engineers – whether he's aware of the fact or not. Elon wants to make dramatic changes to the product, but in his opinion the organization he inherited was too large and unwieldy to achieve this. In other words, he doesn't need software engineers to maintain or optimize the existing codebase; he needs product engineers who can identify problems and opportunities, and execute solutions independently. 
```

Just a slight change of emphasis as we were probably projecting a bit more intent than we could easily support.
